ure Exam 2 Review                   

Sediments
	What are sediments? 

What is the most common sedimentary rock on the surface? 
                                    Shale. A clastic type of rock.

Chemical vs physical (mechanical) weathering. Types of each.
                    Oxidation -Checmical
                    Dissolution – Chemical
                     Hydrolosis – Chemical
                     Hydration – Chemical

                     Jointing- Physichal 
                     Animal – physical
                     Frost wedging – physical
                     Root wedging- physhcial 
                    Salt wedging – physical
                   Thermal expansion

 What are weathering feedbacks?

                        Physical weathering speeds chemical weathering when there is an increase in surface area and chemical weakening increases surface ares via breakage. This works as a positive feedback.

What are soils, what are soil horizons, what horizons comprise the topsoil?

                    Soil- Organic material rock & sediment modified by physical and chemical interaction. 
                    Soil Horizons – Distinct zones where different soil forming processes take place. 
                    A & O horizons comprise of top soil

 How is soil formed, specific factors related its formation. Why must soils be managed and conserved? 

Soil is formed due to many factors
o Climate
o Substrate composition
o Slope steepness
o Drainage
o Time
o vegetation



What are the four classes of sedimentary rocks? 
      Clastic
          Biochemical 
         Organic 
           Chemical 

What are these processes as they related to sedimentary rocks: weathering, erosion, transportation, deposition, lithification. What means transport sediments, most effective? 

How does grain size relate to transport? What do such characteristics as angularity and sorting tell us about the history of a sediment?

The smaller the size of grain the farther the grain(s) will travel or transport. 
Less angular the more it travels the more angular the less it travels 


 How are clastic sedimentary rocks classified? 
Angularity, size , texture , composition , character of cement 

What is a transgression, a regression, how is this manifested in the distribution of sediments? 

Transgession -Flooding due to sea level and pushes sediments near land.
Regression- The sea level decrease causing sediments to go towards the sea. 



What is the carbonate factory, what environmental conditions do carbonates require to flourish? 
Warm, oxiginated, normal salinity marine water. Also oiginiated shallow and clear.

What are sedimentary structures and how are they useful to scientists? 

Bed plates separate strata…. Strata contains the sediments and……
The sedimentary structures show events that have happened such as wind or water movement…… 

What are the major depositional environments and what are the common types of sediments found in those environments?

Mountain,
         Glacial Mountain stream, Alluvian fan
Transitional,
Marine 
        Delatas, Beaches, Shallow marine, Deep marine 



 What is the problem with dolostone?? = poor understanding of how it forms, 
 we do know it is a high Mg form of carbonate, and the process is thought to be
 the result of several potential causes, one of which is chemical alteration and
 replacement of Ca atoms within the crystal lattice of a limestone.





Metamorphism
	What is it, how is it manifested, what is the process, protoliths-what are, what
  protoliths produce common metamorphic rocks. What induces metamorphism?

Metamorphism means that the original was changed in form or shape. It is manifested 
from change in physical or chemical conditions through the process of
o Recrystallization
o Phase change
o Neocrystallization
o Pressure solution
o Plastic deformation
Protoliths are the parents of the rocks that underwent metamorphism
Protoliths that produce common metamorphic rocks would be as follows:
o Mud
o Shale
o Slate
o Phyllite
o Schist
o Gneiss

What induces metamorphism?

The following are what induces metamorphism
o Heat
o Pressure
o Differential stress
o Hydrothermal fluids



 what changes occur during metamorphism?

• Recrystallization
o Minerals change size and shape
• Phase change
o New minerals form with same chemical formular but different crystal structure
• Neocrystallization
o New minerals are created due to P and T changes
Initial minerals become unstable and change into new minerals
Decomposition of the original minerals in the protolith
Chemical reaction of the elements to form new minerals
• Pressure solution
o Mineral grains partially dissolve
• Plastic deformation
o Mineral grains soften and deform

 How is metamorphism related to rock cycle? 

• When a rock is in a metamorphic state, it is the final state that it can be in since it is close to melting
• If it melts more than what it already is, then it is now magma and no longer a rock
o The rock cycle starts over again

What are differences between diagenesis, and metamorphism? 

Diagenesis- the physical chemical biological processes 

(CHECMICAL(Diagenesis) VS HEAT & PRESSURE(Metamorphism)) 

                        Processes of diagenesis – bioturbufication, lithification, Dissolution,  precipitation, diossolution 

            Metamorphism-  Heath, pressure, chemically active fluids AKA HOT WATER 


What are metamorphic facies?

 Is weathering the same as metamorphism? 
Any given metamorphic facies includes different kind of rocks that differ from each other in chemical composition and mineral content but all rocks of given facies form under the same pressure and temperature conditions. 

What are the temperature and pressure conditions associated with high grade vs low grade metamorphic rocks?
                     High grade- high temp
                     low grade – low temp

 What are prograde vs retrograde trajectories in pressure-temperature space? 
                Prograde – High temp, high pressure rising
                 Retrograde- lower temp, low pres, descending 

What are metamorphic aureoles, type of metamorphism they are associated with? 
                                     Metamorphic aureoles - 

Can metamorphic facies vary across a region that has been subjected to orogenesis? 

                                 Yes

Does metamorphism every involve melting? What is foliation and how does it occur during a metamorphic event? 

No metamorphism does not produce melting however igneous rock does. 



Volcanism
	What types of products are produced from volcanic eruptions? 
                    Lava flow, Pyroclastic debris gases

What is contained in the eruption columns commonly seen above central vents of strato volcanoes? 
  ASH

What are the broad chemical differences between rhyolites (felsic rocks), andesites (intermediate rocks), basalts (mafic rocks) with respect to silica, Fe and Mg content; volatile content; viscosity; temperature, flow characteristics, eruptive styles?
    The higher the viscosity the more eplosive it is it won flow as fast
basa


 What are pillow laves, how/where do they form? 
              Mid Ocean ridge, underwater a round blob like a piloow, fine grained.

What are pyroclastic materials, what are the categories for naming the different classes based on? 
                                   Ash,
                                  Lapeili -small rain of magma
                                   Bombs- magma cooling large boulders
                                    Blocks – literally rocks ejected from the volcanoe

 What is ash vs lapilli vs blocks/bombs? 

What are lahars, what are they made of, where are the found, what might start a lahar, what is a lahar made of? What are the most common volatile phases present in melts? 
                     LAHAR 

What effect do volatiles have on melting temperature, degree of explosivity of an eruption, viscosity of a melt, ability of a melt to flow?
                                                                         
The presence of volatile phases in a rock under pressure can stabilize a melt fraction. Conversely, the loss of water and volatiles from a magma may cause it to essentially freeze or solidify

 What are the general flow characteristics for each of the major categories of melts we've discussed? 
                                                 Mafic
Intermediate
Felsic

What are calderas, how do they form, what is the style of eruption associated with caldera formation? 
                       A gigantic volcanic depression 
Magma chamber empties - volcano collapses into it 
Eruption

What are mantle plumes, what are some of the alternative models to explain the existence of intraplate volcanism?   

Columns of hot, solid material that originates deep in the mantle 
Edge Convection, lithospheric delamination, propagating cracks, ET impacts

Are mantle plumes universally accepted? 
 NO

What is a hot spot? 
 A plume of magma that flows through a plate…..

What are rifts, what style/type of volcanism is most often associated with continental rifts? 

Why is Iceland a unique example of volcanism on Earth, what makes it unique? 

Earthquakes
	What are the 3 types of faults we discussed? 
                        Normal , reverse, strike slip, dip slip

What are the stress orientations in each of these? 
Normal – stretching
Reverse- pressed pushed together 
 strike slip, it is going sideways

                        
What is the hanging wall vs the foot wall? 
 Hanging wall is the the part above the miners and the foot wall is the part below the miners….

Be able to draw a cross-sectional sketch of each fault type labeling each block and the relative motions. What are faults, joints, epicenter, hypocenter or focus. 

How is the epicenter of an earthquake determined. 
                         Circles around all the different stations and find the area where all circles intersect 
Radius is equal to the distance to the epicenter

What are the different types of seismic waves-the major classes and the subdivisions within each class, where does each wave type propagate, what are the relative speeds of the 4 types of seismic waves? 

Body waves - pass through Earth's interior 
P waves - compressional - push pull - fastest - solids, liquids, gasses 
S waves - shear - shaking motion - slower - solids 

Surface waves - slowest and most destructive 
Love waves - S waves intersecting the surface - move back and forth like a snake 
Rayleigh waves - P waves intersecting at the surface - move like ripples in pond
What opposes slip along fault planes? 
    FRICTION 

What are foreshocks, aftershocks, how do the relate to the main earthquake? 
 Foreshocks – are before the earthquake
After shocks are shocks after or right during the earthquake smaller can happen for days, weeks, months or years. 

What type of plate boundary do the largest most damaging earthquakes form? 

Type of faulting at each type of plate boundary, orientation of stresses. Can earthquakes be reliably predicted on short/long term basis based on science? 

What are animal precursors prior to seismic or volcanic events, how does science view these? 
       Not real science and no scientific values, Chinese frogs…. Cats…. 


What are tsunamis, how are they generated. 
       Tsnumanis are generated by eqarthquakes also they are big waves 0eters to 10’s of meters high.





























